Among my intimates I once numbered a boatman, known as Old Sol, or, to his familiars, Sol, simply, without the courtesy title, for he was not notably old. I could not say whether his name was an abbreviated form of Solomon, nor if it were, whether the longer name was baptismal or conferred in later years as a tribute to his undoubted wisdom. I have thought it possible that the name was not an abbreviation at all, but was descriptive of my friend's habit of optimism is regard to the weather. For to the cockney oarsman who doubtfully contemplated the meteorological conditions on the upper Thames Sol was unwavering in his encouragement. His certainty that the weather would clear and the sun come out was so inspiring that the pale-faced Londoner cheerfully faced the most unpromising outlook, and started out on his uncertain course up-stream buoyed with a beautiful confidence in Old Sol's infallibility. But for me and for his other intimates, regular clients whose custom was not dependent on the chances of a fine weekend, Sol had another method. In answer to the usual question, "Well, Sol, what's it going to do?" he would first look up into the sky, and then step to the edge of the landing stage and study so much of the horizon as was within his limit of vision; after this careful survey he would deliver his opinion, judicially, and I rarely found him at fault in his prophecy.
Facing my critics, lay and professional, I wish at the outset to disclaim the method by which Sol invigorated the casual amateur. I am not prophesying unlimited sunshine for every one, without regard to conditions. In this book will be found no mention of royal roads, panaceas, or grand specifics. Rather I have attempted to treat every reader as Sol treated his intimates. I have looked into the sky and made a careful survey of the horizon. It is true that I have seen an ideal and the promise of its fulfillment, but by deductions have been drawn with patient care from signs which I have studied with diligence; if I am an optimist, it is because I see the promise of fair weather, and not because I wish to delude the unwary. And with this I will lay down my metaphor and come to a practical statement.
I know that I shall be regarded in many quarters as a revolutionary and a heretic, for my theory and practice, though founded on a principle as old as the life of man, are not in accord with, or even a development of, the tradition which still obtains. But in thus rejecting tradition I am, happily, sustained by something more than an unproved theory. Moreover, on this firm ground I do not stand alone. Though my theory may appear revolutionary and heretical, it is shared by men of attainment in science and medicine. On a small scale I have made many converts, and in now making appeal to a wider circle I am upheld by the knowledge that what I have to say can no longer be classed as an isolated opinion.
Not that I should have hesitated to come forward now, even if I had been without support. During the past six years I have built up a practice in London which has reached the bounds of my capacity. This work has not been done by any advancement of a wavering hypothesis. I have had cases brought to me as the result of the failure of may kinds of treatment, of rest cures, relaxation cures, hypnotism, faith cures, physical culture, and the ordinary medical prescriptions—and in the treatment of these cases, in my own observations, and in the appreciation of the patients themselves, I have had abundant opportunity to prove to my own satisfaction that in its application to present needs my theory has stood the test of practice in every circumstance and condition.
That the limits imposed by the present work render it woefully inadequate I am quite willing to admit, but the necessity for a certain urgency has been forced upon me, and I have deemed it wiser to outline my subject at once rather than wait for the time when I shall be ready to publish my larger work, and I have at the same time reprinted in this book two earlier pamphlets, namely one on Respiratory Re-Education and one on the Kinaesthetic Systems.
With regard to the larger work I can say little here, save that it will be the natural continuation of this book which may well serve as a preface. I have, now, space sufficient only to indicate the foundations of my belief, but I hope very soon to present the superstructure complete in every detail. In this book I have confined myself to the primary argument and indicated the direction in which we may find physical completeness. In the work which will follow I shall deal with the detailed evidence of the application of my theory to life, of cases and cures, and all the substance of experience.
There are, however, many reasons why I should hesitate no longer in making my preliminary appeal, and chief among them is the appalling physical deterioration that can be seen by any intelligent observer who will walk the streets of London, for example, and not the form and aspect of the average individual who make up the crowd. So much for the surface. What inferences can we not draw from the statistics? What are we to make of the disproportionate increase of insanity, cancer, and appendicitis, which appears undeniable, to take these three instances only? For the increase progresses despite the fact that we have taken the subject seriously to heart. Now I would not fall into the common fallacy of post hoc ergo propter hoc, and say that because the increase of these evils has gone hand-in-hand with our endeavours to raise the standard by physical culture theories, relaxation exercises, rest cures, and hoc genus omne, therefore the one is the result of the other; but I do maintain—lacking more definite proof on the first point—that if physical culture exercises, etc., had done all that they were hoped to do, the must be considered a complete failure in the checking of the three evils I have instanced.
Are these troubles still to increase, then? Are we to wait while the bacteriologist patiently investigates the nature of these diseases, till he triumphantly isolates some characteristic germ and announces that here, at last, is the dread bacillus of cancer? Should we even then be any nearer a cure? Could we rely on inoculation, and if we could, in this case, what is to be the end? Are we to be inoculated against every known disease till our bodies become depressed and enervated sterilities, incapable of action on their own account? I pray not, for such a physical condition would imply a mental condition even more pitiable. The science of bacteriology has its uses, but they are the uses of research rather than of application. Bacteriology reveals the agents active in disease, but it says nothing about the conditions which permit these agents to become active. Therefore I look to that wonderful instrument, the human body, for the true solution of our difficulty, an instrument so inimitably adaptable, so full of marvellous potentialities of resistance and recuperation that it is able, when properly used, to overcome all the forces of disease.
In this thing I do not address myself to any one class or section of the community. I have tried in what follows to avoid, so far as may be, any terminology, any medical or scientific phrases and technicalities, and to speak to the entire intelligent public. I wish the scheme I have here adumbrated to be taken up universally, and not to be restricted to the advantage of any body, medical or otherwise. I wish to do away with such teachers as I am myself. My place in the present economy is due to a misunderstanding of the causes of our present physical disability, and when this disability is finally eliminated, the specialized practitioner will have no place, no uses. This may be a dream of the future, but in its beginnings it is now capable of realization. Every man, woman, and child holds the possibility of physical perfection; it rests with each of us to attain it by personal understanding and effort.
Man's Supreme Inheritance
From Primitive Conditions to Present Needs
'Our contemporaries of this and the rising generation appear to be hardly aware that we are witnessing the last act of a long drama, a tragedy and a comedy in one, which is being silently played, with no fanfare of trumpet or roll of drums, before our eyes on the stage of history. Whatever becomes of the savages, the curtain must soon descend on savagery for ever.' —J. G. Frazer
The long process of evolution still moves quietly to its unknown accomplishment; struggle and starvation, the hard fight for existence working with fine impartiality, remorselessly eliminates the weak and defective; new variations are developed and old types no further adaptable become extinct, and thus life fighting for life improves towards a sublimation we cannot foresee. But at some period of the world's history an offshoot of a dominant type began to develop new powers that were destined to change the face of the world. What first influenced the trend of that new development we can only guess, dimly. It may have been as a modern French writer 1suggests, that courage was a determining factor, a suggestion that is at once consistent with our surmises as to the prevailing conditions and acceptable to our intellectual pride. Whatever the influence which first begot these new powers, they held strange potentialities, and, among others, that which now immediately concerns us — the potentiality to counteract the force of evolution itself.
This is, indeed, at once the greatest triumph of our intellectual growth and the self-constituted danger which threatens us from within. Man has arisen above nature, bent circumstance to his will, and striven in antagonism to the mighty force of evolution. He has pried into the great workshop and interfered with the machinery, endeavouring to become master of its action and to control the workings of its component parts. But the machine has as yet proved too intricate for his complete comprehension, slowly he has learned the uses of a few parts which he is able to operate, but it is only a small fraction of the whole.
What then is man's position today, and what is his danger? His position is this: By emerging from the contest with nature he has ceased to be a natural animal. He has evolved curious powers of discrimination, of choice, and of construction. He has changed his environment, his food, and his whole manner of living. He has inquired into the laws which govern heredity and into the causes of disease. But still his knowledge is limited, and his emergence incomplete. The power of the force we know as evolution still holds him in chains, though man has loosened his bonds and may at last free himself entirely. Thus we come to man's danger.
Evolution—a term we use here and elsewhere in this connection as that which is best understood to indicate the whole operation
of natural selection and all that it connotes—has two clearly defined functions: by the one of these it develops; by the other destroys. By an infinitely slow action it has developed such wonders as the human eye or hand; by a process somewhat less tedious it allows any organ that has become useless to perish, such as the pineal eye or (in process) the vermiform appendix, and if we can estimate the future course, the teeth and hair.
By the change he has effected in his mode of life, man is no longer necessarily dependent upon his physical organism for the means of his subsistence, and in cases where he is still so dependent, such as those of the agriculturist, the artisan, and others who earn a living by manual labour, he employs his muscles in new ways, in mechanical repetitions of the same act, or in modes of labour which are far removed from those called forth by primitive conditions. In some ways the physical type which represents the rural labouring population is, in my opinion, even more degenerate than the type we find in cities, and mentally there can be no comparison between the two. The truth is that man, whether living in town or country, has changed his habitat and with it his habits, and in so doing has put himself in a new danger, for though evolution may be cruel in its methods, it is the cruelty of a discipline without which our bodies become relaxed, our muscles atrophied, and our functions put out of gear.
The antagonism of conscious as opposed to natural selection2 has now been in existence for many thousands of years, but it is only within the last century or less that the effect upon man's constitution has become so marked that this danger of deterioration or.
It should, however, be clearly understood in this connection that certain laws of natural selection must, so far as we can see, always hold good; and it would not be advisable to alter them even if it were possible. For example, that curious law may be cited which ordains the attraction of opposites in mating and so maintains nature's average. The attraction which a certain type of woman has for a certain type of man, and vice decay has been thrust upon the attention, not only of scientific observers, but of the average, intelligent individual. No examination of history is necessary in this place to set out a reason for this comparatively sudden realization of physical unfitness. Briefly, the civilization of the past hundred years has been unlike the many that have preceded it in that it has not been confined to any single nation or empire. In the past history of the world an intellectual civilization such as that of Egypt, Persia, Greece, or Rome, perished from internal causes, and chief among them was a moral and physical deterioration which rendered the nation unequal to a struggle with younger, more vigorous and—this is important—wilder, more natural peoples. Thus we have good cause for believing that the danger we have indicated, though still incipient only, was a determining cause in the downfall of past civilizations. But we must not overlook the fact that destructive wars and devastating plagues held sway in the earlier history of mankind, and while the latter acted as an instrument of evolution in destroying the unfit, the former by decreasing the population threw a burden of initiative and energy on the remnant, necessitating the use of active, physical qualities in the business of all kinds of production.
Now the conditions have altered. Greater scientific attainments in every direction than have ever been known, have combated, and will probably in the future overcome the devastating diseases which have decimated the populations of cities; while a higher ethical ideal tends ever to oppose the horrible and repugnant barbarism of war which, as civilization grows, constantly spreading, even to the peoples of the Orient, becomes to our senses more and more fratricidal, a fight of brother against brother.
A hundred years ago, Malthus, a prophet, if not a seer, recognized our danger, and within the past quarter of a century a dozen theorists have proposed remedies less stringent than those advocated by Malthus, but almost equally futile. Among the theorists are those reactionaries (consciously or unconsciously) who advocate the simple life by a return to natural food and conditions, in endlessly various suggestions. To them in their search for natural foods and conditions we would point out that countless generations separate us from primitive man, a lapse of time during which our functions have become gradually adapted to new habits and environment; and that if it were possible by universal agreement for the peoples of Europe to return instantly to primitive methods of living, the effect would be no less disastrous than the reversal of the process, the sudden thrusting of our civilization upon savage tribes whereby—to quote one or two recent examples only—the aborigines of North America, New Zealand, and Japan (the Ainu tribes) have become, or are rapidly becoming, extinct.
When we point out man's power of adaptability in this connection, therefore, the emphasis is thrown on the slowness with which that adaptability is passed on to our descendants and the relative permanence of the new powers acquired. For our purpose the argument remains good whether we admit or deny the inheritability of acquired characteristics, our point being that in either case the process is necessarily a slow one, though it is plainly more rapid if the hypothesis be true.
It becomes necessary, if we would be consistent, to reject at once all propositions for improving our future well-being, which can by any possibility be described as reactionary. Even in this brief resume of man's history one tendency stands out clearly enough, the tendency to advance. When that first offshoot from a dominant type began to develop new powers of intellect a form was initiated which must either progress or perish. Atavism must be counteracted by the powers of the mind, and reaction is a form of atavism. No return to earlier conditions can increase our knowledge of the secret springs of life, can aid our formulation of world-laws by the understanding of which we may hope to control the future course of development.
In the mind of man lies the secret of his ability to resist, to conquer and finally to govern the circumstance of his life, and only by the discovery of that secret will he ever be able to realize completely the perfect condition of mens sana in corpore sano versa, is, in my opinion, a fundamental law, and any attempt to regulate it would be harmful to the race. This, however, is no argument against the regulation or prevention of marriage, between the physically and mentally unfit.